Updated June 4, 2018

This Terms of Sale governs the sale of Washington Post Digital Products (the “Digital Products”). By using the Digital Products, you also agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

Digital Products The Washington Post Digital Products include the website (www.washingtonpost.com), mobile site, and tablet and mobile apps. You are not necessarily required to purchase anything to use The Post’s Digital Products. If you do not purchase a subscription or product, however, your access to the Digital Products will be limited You can view The Post’s various subscription offerings at https://subscribe.washingtonpost.com. We also offer gift subscriptions at https://subscribe.washingtonpost.com/gift. The Post reserves the right to modify the content, type and availability of any Digital Product at any time.

Subscription a. Auto-renewing Subscription. Your Digital Products subscription, which may start with a promotional rate, will auto-renew at the end of the cycle stated at the time of your order (“Billing Period”) unless and until you cancel your subscription or we terminate it. You can view the date of your next scheduled payment by visiting our website and clicking on the “My Account” link. You will not receive a notice from us that your promotional period has ended or that your subscription has auto-renewed. b. Differing Subscriptions/Promotions. The Post may offer a number of types of subscriptions, including subscriptions to different Washington Post products and special promotions. Any materially different terms from those described in these Terms of Sale will be disclosed at the time of purchase or in other communications made available to you. You can find specific details regarding your subscription visiting our website and clicking on the “My Account” link. We reserve the right to change or terminate any offered subscriptions or promotions at any time. c. Premium EU Subscription.Users in the European Economic Area (“EEA”) and Switzerland have the option to subscribe to our Premium EU product, which offers unlimited access to www.washingtonpost.com (the “Site”) on any device, as well as all of our apps. The Premium EU product has no advertising or third-party ad tracking on the Site. Please note, however, that the Site, may include content embedded from other sites and services (such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube) and that such third-party content may contain some advertising and third-party ad tracking from those sites or services. In addition, our apps and newsletters may contain advertising and third-party ad tracking. Please view our Privacy Policy for more information.

Billing a. Payment Method. You can pay for your subscription with a major credit card, or by Amazon Pay or PayPal (“Payment Method”). Only credit cards, Amazon Pay or PayPal are eligible for payment. Do not sign up for a subscription by identifying a debit card in the credit card option. A debit card may also be known as a “check” or “ATM” card and typically has the word “debit” on it. You may edit your Payment Method information by visiting our website and clicking on the “My Account” link. If your payment is unsuccessful by reason of insufficient funds, expiration, or otherwise, you remain responsible for any uncollected amount. b. Recurring Billing. By placing an order for a subscription, you authorize us to charge you the subscription fee then in effect at the beginning of each Billing Period, plus applicable taxes, to your Payment Method. You acknowledge that the amount charged each Billing Period may vary for reasons that may include price changes, changing your subscription, or changes in applicable taxes, and you authorize us to charge your Payment Method for such varying amount each Billing Period.Applicable taxes may vary. For example, you authorize us to charge your Payment Method the promotional rate disclosed on the subscription screen in the initial Billing Period (if applicable) and the regular subscription rate in subsequent Billing Periods, each with applicable taxes. We automatically bill your Payment Method on the last day of each Billing Period. We reserve the right to change the timing of our billing, in particular, in the event your Payment Method has not successfully settled. If your Payment Method is declined for a recurring payment of your subscription fee, you have four (4) days to provide us a new Payment Method or your subscription will be canceled. c. Price Changes. We reserve the right to change subscription fees for any of our subscriptions at any time. We will notify you of any changes if the regular fee for your subscription changes from what was stated at the time of your initial order. You will have an opportunity to cancel your subscription at that time. If you do not cancel your subscription, you will be charged the new subscription fee at your next Billing Period. d. Billing Period. We will charge the subscription fee at the commencement of your subscription or, if applicable, at the end of your free trial period, and automatically on the first calendar day of each Billing Period thereafter unless and until your subscription is cancelled. e. One-Time Purchases. When you purchase a stand-along product, such as a gift subscription, we will charge your Payment Method at the time of purchase.