Advice columnist

Adapted from an online discussion.

Hi, Carolyn: Now that I'm getting pretty good at setting boundaries (thank you for your help with that!), how do I stop feeling guilty about it?

For example, I plan my entire week so I don't have to leave the house on Sundays. It's my day to spend time with my dogs, get things done around the house, or just sit around and watch old movies if that's what I want to do. My aunt texted me in a panic and asked me to come over and fix her TV last Sunday. I told her I couldn't do it that day but could do it the next day. She agreed after some begging and guilt-tripping.

But I was still questioning myself two hours later. Would it really have been so bad to go over there for an hour? Well, yes, because I would have had to put off my housework and dig my car out of the snow just to fix a TV — and there's another working TV in her house.

So why do I continue to feel guilty and think about it after the fact? This happens pretty much every time I say no to someone.

— Feeling Guilty



(Nick Galifianakis/For The Washington Post)

Feeling Guilty: When the only way you know to set boundaries is through reading and a few “aha” moments and some deliberate new steps, it means you were raised not to have them and instead to say yes to everything because you were afraid you’d be punished for it, if only through people not liking you for saying no to them.

That’s a lot of emotional training to have to undo. So be patient with yourself. The guilt problem might just go away with practice.

Also give some thought to what triggers these spasms of guilt. What if your aunt had just said, “Tomorrow’s great — thank you so much!” Would you have felt any guilt afterward for not dropping everything on the spot to go help?

I’m guessing not. And that means you can do something to accelerate your progress toward living guilt-free: Recognize that you still feel the effects of other people’s expectations.

So, you’ll need to reinforce your own conviction that you’re entitled to choose how you use your time — and others aren’t. This is the bedrock on which all good boundaries rest: the certainty that it isn’t selfish to have them.

Just because panicky aunts have expectations of you, doesn’t mean you’re obligated to meet them; remind yourself of that whenever you feel people tugging at you from the other side of your boundary.

It can also help to keep an eye out for people who don’t guilt-trip you, and to reserve any special leave-the-house-on-Sunday kindnesses for them. Reward the behavior you appreciate, not the behavior that dredges up lingering feelings of guilt.

Re: Guilt: What helped me was realizing the people in my life were used to guilt-tripping me all the time, because it worked! You are not just changing your habits, you are changing theirs. It is difficult to do, but you will be happier in the long run, and everyone, not just you, will adjust! Hang in there!

— Anonymous

Anonymous: Excellent point on retraining others, thanks.