The abrupt withdrawal of U.S. troops from Syria has unleashed dramatic developments, with Syrian government forces retaking territory long held by U.S. allies and Turkish-led forces expanding their offensive. Here’s what we know so far.

●Syrian government troops have moved back into towns in northeastern Syria for the first time in years after U.S.-allied Kurdish fighters, in a stunning reversal, reached a deal with the government.

●Turkish-backed rebels have announced the start of a military operation to retake the northern city of Manbij, which has long been a flash point.

●Hundreds of Islamic State family members have escaped a detention camp in Ain Issa, which has been the administrative capital of the Kurdish-led government in northeastern Syria.

Forces loyal to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad took up positions Monday in several key towns across northeastern Syria, state media and a war monitoring group reported, following a dramatic 11th-hour deal with local Kurdish fighters to ward off a Turkish assault.

For the first time in years, Syrian troops deployed to Tabqa, on the outskirts of Raqqa, and to the headquarters of the Kurdish-led administration in Ain Issa, about 20 miles from the Turkish border.

But even as the Syrian government and Kurdish-led forces hashed out the details of their agreement, Turkish-backed Syrian rebels separately announced the start of an operation to retake the northern city of Manbij, where U.S. troops had been stationed.

Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan hinted earlier Monday at a broadening of Turkey’s offensive, which began last week. He said Turkey was “in the process of implementing our decision on the subject of Manbij,” a Syrian town about 25 miles west of the Euphrates River.





Turkey had long demanded that the United States expel Kurdish fighters from the town and complained that a deal struck with Washington to remove the fighters was not being implemented.

Turkish officials view the Kurdish fighters — known as the Syrian Democratic Forces, or SDF — as terrorists for their links to the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, or PKK, which has waged a decades-long war for autonomy inside Turkey. Its military launched the operation with allied Syrian rebels to oust the SDF from the Syrian-Turkish border, where it planned to install a buffer zone.

[Turkish-led forces film themselves executing a Kurdish captive in Syria]



As the campaign escalated, aid agencies pulled out of the area, and President Trump ordered the final withdrawal of all U.S. troops in the coming weeks.

On Monday, Trump suggested, without evidence, that Kurdish forces may have purposely released some Islamic State prisoners amid the fighting to prevent U.S. troops from withdrawing from the region.

“Kurds may be releasing some to get us involved,” Trump said Monday on Twitter. “Do people really think we should go to war with NATO Member Turkey?”

On Sunday, hundreds of family members of Islamic State fighters escaped a detention camp in Ain Issa after Turkish shell fire hit the area.

Security has generally deteriorated around a constellation of camps housing families who fled battles against the Islamic State — among them the relatives of militants. Some 950 foreign women and children were among potentially thousands of escapees from the Ain Issa camp.

The United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said late Sunday that it had “grave concerns” for the population of the camp, which hosts approximately 13,000 civilians.

On the road to al-Hol, a sprawling camp holding 70,000 people disgorged from the Islamic State's final scrap of territory, SDF forces have also pulled back.

“It’s quiet in the camp for now, but we’re all scared of the uncertainty,” said a medic, speaking on the condition of anonymity because she was not authorized to speak to the media. “We thought that America would protect us here. Why are they walking away?”



Turkish-backed Syrian rebels drive on a street in the Turkish border town of Akcakale in Sanliurfa province, Turkey, Oct. 14, 2019. (Stoyan Nenov/Reuters)

The sudden return of Assad’s forces to areas of northeastern Syria promises to further roil security in that region, analysts said, and marks a stunning reversal for Syrian Kurdish authorities, whose fighters once controlled a wide swath of territory.

A statement from the Kurdish-led administration Monday said the agreement was a “military deal to protect Syria’s borders and Syrian sovereignty against Turkish aggression.”

The statement said that Kurdish-led institutions were continuing their work as normal but offered no other details.

In a video published by the state-run Syrian Arab News Agency (SANA), residents of the nearby village of Tel Tamer threw rice and candy in the air as they approached a line of government soldiers.

“With our soul, with our blood, we sacrifice for you, Bashar!” they said, reciting a chant praising the president.

[In Syria, U.S. pullout and Turkish assault sparks exodus to anywhere that feels safe ]

Dadouch reported from Beirut. Louisa Loveluck in Irbil, Iraq, contributed to this report.

Read more

Europeans warn of security peril from Turkey’s assault on Kurds in Syria

U. S.-allied Kurds strike deal to bring Assad’s Syrian troops back into Kurdish areas

Today’s coverage from Post correspondents around the world

Like Washington Post World on Facebook and stay updated on foreign news