

President Trump walks to board Marine One on the South Lawn at the White House on Thursday. (Jabin Botsford/The Washington Post)

President Trump renewed his call to unmask the whistleblower whose complaint sparked an impeachment inquiry, and he took issue with a suggestion by a leading Democrat that the anonymous U.S. intelligence official may not be called to testify in person before Congress.

Trump’s comments, relayed in morning tweets, came as House investigators prepared to hear from Fiona Hill, the White House’s former top Russia adviser, about how the administration’s Ukraine policies were influenced by the efforts of Trump’s personal lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani to have the country investigate the son of former vice president Joe Biden.

With Congress returning to Washington after a two-week recess, several other depositions are also planned, including that of key figure Gordon Sondland, the U.S. ambassador to the European Union, who is scheduled to appear Thursday under subpoena.

Ahead of Hill’s testimony, one GOP lawmaker decried the process as a “clown show.”

● Rep. Adam B. Schiff hints that panel may not press whistleblower to testify in person.

● Hunter Biden says he will resign from Chinese company board and won’t take foreign work if his father is president.

● Trump’s envoy to testify that the contention of ‘no quid pro quo’ came from Trump.

The whistleblower complaint | The rough transcript of Trump’s call with Zelensky |The letter from White House counsel to House leaders

10:30 a.m.: Starr says impeachment inquiry ‘doomed to fail’

During a Monday morning appearance on Fox News, former independent counsel Ken Starr said he doesn’t believe Trump committed an impeachable offense — unlike former president Bill Clinton.

Starr, whose investigation led to Clinton’s impeachment in 1998, has been a vocal critic of the Democratic-led impeachment inquiry into Trump. In previous Fox News interviews, he said Trump had shown “poor judgment” in asking the Ukrainian president to investigate Biden but said nothing has risen to the level of being criminal.

“I don’t believe there’s anything close to an impeachable offense here,” Starr said. He said Clinton, by contrast, “clearly committed crimes, federal crimes.”

The Trump impeachment inquiry, Starr added, “is doomed to fail.”

9:50 a.m.: GOP lawmakers call for opening process

Ahead of Hill’s closed-door deposition Monday, several Republican lawmakers decried the process, calling for the proceedings to be more transparent to the public.

Speaking to reporters, the Republicans argued that the depositions should be open and that the full transcripts of closed-doors sessions should be publicly released.

“Our position is that the American public should know about all of the facts,” said Rep, Lee Zeldin (R-N.Y.). “We want the American public to have all of the information they should have in real time.”

“On the process and the substance, there is so much that’s so wrong on this entire clown show,” he added.

Rep. Scott Perry (R-Pa.) described the current proceedings as a “partisan star chamber” and said Democrats are leaking “selective things they want for their narrative.”

“Where else in America does that happen?” he asked, adding: “We want the transcripts released for all the American people so they can see with their own eyes the whole context of what’s going on.”

9:30 a.m.: Attacks against Schiff are escalating online

Hours after Trump mused online about whether the Democratic lawmaker leading the impeachment inquiry, Rep. Schiff, should be “arrested for treason,” a 53-year-old mother of four in Wisconsin retweeted Trump’s post to her few hundred followers and added her own take.

“SHIFTY SHIFF NEEDS TO BE HUNG,” wrote Jean Spanbauer, a onetime supporter of President Barack Obama. She had adopted Trump’s epithet for the California Democrat, slightly misspelling his name.

“As you can see, my tweets are pretty passionate,” Spanbauer, who uses a different name online, said in an interview, adding that she doesn’t specifically wish anyone physical harm. “It hits very close to home for me. What the Democrats are doing to our president, to the office and to the people of this country is disgusting.”

As Trump and his allies have aimed increasingly caustic language at Schiff in recent days, the attacks have been echoed by supporters on social media who often take the message a step further — invoking physical violence against one of the most prominent Democrats overseeing the inquiry that threatens Trump’s presidency.

Read more here.

— Isaac Stanley-Becker

9:25 a.m.: Several document deadlines set this week

In addition to scheduling several depositions, House investigators have set deadlines this week for documents related to the impeachment inquiry for several people and government agencies. Some of those are all but certain to be ignored, given the White House’s letter last week saying it would not cooperate with the inquiry.

House Democrats have set Tuesday as the deadline for documents from Giuliani, Vice President Pence, the Department of Defense, and the Office of Management and Budget.

During an appearance Sunday on CBS’s “Face the Nation,” Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper said “we will do everything we can to comply” with the subpoena for documents from his department, which focused on the withholding of military aid to Ukraine.

Wednesday is the deadline for Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman, the two Giuliani associates who were arrested last week on campaign finance charges. They have helped Giuliani with his investigation of the Bidens.

Friday, meanwhile, is the deadline for documents from the White House and Energy Secretary Rick Perry. Trump has said Perry asked him to make the July call to Zelensky, but Perry told reporters last week he did it so that the two could talk about energy issues.

[Rick Perry has been subpoenaed. Will he comply?]

9:05 a.m.: Hill arrives on the Hill for closed-door deposition

Hill, the White House’s former top Russia adviser, has arrived on Capitol Hill for a closed-door deposition with three House panels as part of the impeachment inquiry. Her interview is scheduled to begin at 10 a.m.

She is appearing under subpoena.

9 a.m.: White House says Trump not expected in public today

The White House has called a travel/photo lid for the day, meaning reporters are not expected to see Trump in public on Monday.

Trump has no public events scheduled on this Columbus Day holiday. He has already tweeted several times about impeachment, but apparently he will not be commenting in person about the proceedings before Tuesday.

8 a.m.: Trump’s former top Russia adviser to testify in impeachment probe

Hill is expected to speak to House investigators behind closed doors Monday at 10 a.m. about how the administration’s Ukraine policies were influenced by Giuliani’s efforts to have the country investigate Hunter Biden, the former vice president’s son.

Hill served as the president’s top Russia and Europe adviser on the National Security Council from mid-2017 until the week before Trump and Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky spoke in a July 25 phone call that is at the heart of House Democrats’ impeachment inquiry.

A transcript of the phone call shows that during the exchange, Trump asked Zelensky for a “favor,” requesting Ukrainian officials look into a debunked conspiracy theory regarding the 2016 election and the energy company Burisma, which paid Hunter Biden to sit on its board.

Hill will be the third high-ranking current or former diplomat that the House Intelligence, Foreign Affairs and Oversight and Reform committees will depose as part of their accelerating impeachment probe.

Read more here.

— Karoun Demirjian

7 a.m.: ABC News says Hunter Biden interview will air on Tuesday

ABC News announced that it had interviewed Hunter Biden over the weekend at his Los Angeles home and said portions of the interview would begin airing Tuesday morning.

Trump has been relentless in making unsubstantiated claims that Hunter Biden was involved in corrupt dealings in Ukraine and China and has made an issue of his recent public silence. Biden said through his lawyer Sunday that will step down from his position as a board director of a Chinese company this month and promised not to do any work for foreign firms if his father, Joe Biden, is elected president.

The former vice president has stood by his son and said he would be a part of his presidential campaign.

6:45 a.m. Trump renews call to disclose whistleblower’s identify

Trump on Monday renewed his call to unmask the whistleblower and seized on comments by Schiff suggesting that House Democrats may not press the anonymous U.S. intelligence official to testify in person before Congress.

In morning tweets, Trump also continued to insist that the whistleblower did not accurately describe the phone call in which Trump pressed Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky to investigate the Bidens at a time when the United States had withheld military aid to Ukraine.

In fact, the whistleblower’s account closely tracks a rough transcript of the call released by the White House.

“Adam Schiff now doesn’t seem to want the Whistleblower to testify,” Trump tweeted. “NO! Must testify to explain why he got my Ukraine conversation sooo wrong, not even close. Did Schiff tell him to do that? We must determine the Whistleblower’s identity to determine WHY this was done to the USA.”

Schiff, who had originally suggested it was important for the whistleblower to provide closed-door testimony, backed off that stance during an appearance Sunday on CBS News’s “Face the Nation.”

“Given that we already have the call record, we don’t need the whistleblower who wasn’t on the call to tell us what took place during the call,” Schiff said. “We have the best evidence of that.”

In Monday tweets, Trump also renewed his complaint that Schiff offered an embellished version of the call with Zelensky during a recent hearing. Schiff said that he remarks were intended to be in part parody and that Trump should have recognized that.

“Democrat’s game was foiled when we caught Schiff fraudulently making up my Ukraine conversation, when I released the exact conversation Transcript,” Trump tweeted.

6:30 a.m.: Cheney says impeachment a factor in Turkish invasion

Rep. Liz Cheney (Wyo.), the No. 3 Republican in the House, on Monday argued that the Democratic-led impeachment inquiry was a factor in the Turkish invasion of northeastern Syria.

During an interview on Fox News’s “Fox & Friends,” Cheney said that abandoning Kurdish fighters allied with the United States would have negative consequences but suggested Democrats were partly to blame for Trump’s announcement that he wouldn’t impede the Turkish invasion.

“I think that what we’re seeing happen is going to have ramifications not just in the Middle East but around the world if our adversaries begin to sense weakness, if our adversaries begin to think we won’t defend our allies, that we won’t defend our interests, that’s provocative,” Cheney said.

“But I also want to say that the impeachment proceedings that are going on and what the Democrats are doing themselves to try to weaken this president is part of this. There was not an accident that the Turks chose this moment to roll across the border, and I think the Democrats have got to pay very careful attention to the damage they’re doing with the impeachment proceedings.”

6 a.m.: The impeachment crisis shines a spotlight on Trump’s state of mind

He was hectoring and imperious. He was domineering and defiant. And he was audacious and cavalier.

In the nearly three weeks since House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) opened an impeachment inquiry, President Trump has struck a posture of raw aggression. His visceral defenses of himself — at the most vulnerable point of his presidency — have shined a spotlight on Trump’s state of mind.

Like an aging rock star, the president is now reprising many of the greatest hits from his hellion days. He has bullied and projected — at times leveling against others the very charges he faces — while simultaneously depicting himself as a victim. And he has turned to ominous depictions of America, and in moments sounded an authoritarian tone.

Read more here.

— Ashley Parker and Philip Rucker

5 a.m.: Trump highlights Fox News host saying serial killers get more due process

Trump on late Sunday quoted a Fox News host saying that serial killers get more due process than Trump is receiving during the impeachment proceedings.

“Serial killers get more Due Process than the Democrats give to the President of the United States,” Trump tweeted, sharing a quote attributed to Mark Levin, host of “The Mark Levin Show.”

Earlier Sunday, Trump had urged his more than 65 million Twitter followers to watch Levin’s broadcast Sunday night, calling it “a big show tonight on the Democrat’s Impeachment Scam.”

Rep. Ted Lieu (D-Calif.) took issue with Trump’s later tweet, writing: “Quote cited by @realDonaldTrump is wrong.”

“In an impeachment investigation, the House acts like a grand jury. In a grand jury, the defendant cannot see or cross examine the witnesses. Here, we allow GOP Members to be in impeachment depositions & to cross examine witnesses.”